## Brief

### Preparation

Write about any preparations needed for the lesson, such as tools, installations, prior-knowledge, etcs.

### Lesson Overview

This module focuses on the operational excellence pillar and how to apply it as the foundation of your well-architected solutions. Operational excellence is challenging to achieve in environments where operations is perceived as a function isolated and distinct from the lines of business and development teams that it supports. By adopting the practices in this module you can build architectures that provide insight to their status, are enabled for effective and efficient operation and event response, and can continue to improve and support your business goals. 

---

## Part 1 - Operational Excellence Principles

There are five design principles for operational excellence in the cloud:

- **Perform operations as code**: In the cloud, you can apply the same engineering discipline that you use for application code to your entire environment. You can define your entire workload (applications, infrastructure) as code and update it with code. You can implement your operations procedures as code and automate their execution by triggering them in response to events. By performing operations as code, you limit human error and enable consistent responses to events.
- **Make frequent, small, reversible changes**: Design workloads to allow components to be updated regularly. Make changes in small increments that can be reversed if they fail (without affecting customers when possible).
- **Refine operations procedures frequently**: As you use operations procedures, look for opportunities to improve them. As you evolve your workload, evolve your procedures appropriately. Set up regular game days to review and validate that all procedures are effective and that teams are familiar with them.
- **Anticipate failure**: Perform “pre-mortem” exercises to identify potential sources of failure so that they can be removed or mitigated. Test your failure scenarios and validate your understanding of their impact. Test your response procedures to ensure that they are effective, and that teams are familiar with their execution. Set up regular game days to test workloads and team responses to simulated events.
- **Learn from all operational failures**: Drive improvement through lessons learned from all operational events and failures. Share what is learned across teams and through the entire organization.

---

## Part 2 - Best Practice for Operational Excellence

There are four best practice areas for operational excellence in the cloud:

- Organization
- Prepare
- Operate
- Evolve


Your organization’s leadership defines business objectives. Your organization must understand requirements and priorities and use these to organize and conduct work to support the achievement of business outcomes. Your workload must emit the information necessary to support it. Implementing services to enable integration, deployment, and delivery of your workload will enable an increased flow of beneficial changes into production by automating repetitive processes.

There may be risks inherent in the operation of your workload. You must understand those risks and make an informed decision to enter production. Your teams must be able to support your workload. Business and operational metrics derived from desired business outcomes will enable you to understand the health of your workload, your operations activities, and respond to incidents. Your priorities will change as your business needs and business environment changes. Use these as a feedback loop to continually drive improvement for your organization and the operation of your workload.

### Organization
Your teams need to have a shared understanding of your entire workload, their role in it, and shared business goals to set the priorities that will enable business success. Well-defined priorities will maximize the benefits of your efforts. Evaluate internal and external customer needs involving key stakeholders, including business, development, and operations teams, to determine where to focus efforts. Evaluating customer needs will ensure that you have a thorough understanding of the support that is required to achieve business outcomes. Ensure that you are aware of guidelines or obligations defined by your organizational governance and external factors, such as regulatory compliance requirements and industry standards, that may mandate or emphasize specific focus. Validate that you have mechanisms to identify changes to internal governance and external compliance requirements. If no requirements are identified, ensure that you have applied due diligence to this determination. Review your priorities regularly so that they can be updated as needs change.

Evaluate threats to the business (for example, business risk and liabilities, and information security threats) and maintain this information in a risk registry. Evaluate the impact of risks, and tradeoffs between competing interests or alternative approaches. For example, accelerating speed to market for new features may be emphasized over cost optimization, or you may choose a relational database for non-relational data to simplify the effort to migrate a system without refactoring. Manage benefits and risks to make informed decisions when determining where to focus efforts. Some risks or choices may be acceptable for a time, it may be possible to mitigate associated risks, or it may become unacceptable to allow a risk to remain, in which case you will take action to address the risk.

Your teams must understand their part in achieving business outcomes. Teams need to understand their roles in the success of other teams, the role of other teams in their success, and have shared goals. Understanding responsibility, ownership, how decisions are made, and who has authority to make decisions will help focus efforts and maximize the benefits from your teams. The needs of a team will be shaped by the customer they support, their organization, the makeup of the team, and the characteristics of their workload. It's unreasonable to expect a single operating model to be able to support all teams and their workloads in your organization.

Ensure that there are identified owners for each application, workload, platform, and infrastructure component, and that each process and procedure has an identified owner responsible for its definition, and owners responsible for their performance. Having understanding of the business value of each component, process, and procedure, of why those resources are in place or activities are performed, and why that ownership exists will inform the actions of your team members. Clearly define the responsibilities of team members so that they may act appropriately and have mechanisms to identify responsibility and ownership. Have mechanisms to request additions, changes, and exceptions so that you do not constrain innovation. Define agreements between teams describing how they work together to support each other and your business outcomes.

Provide support for your team members so that they can be more effective in taking action and supporting your business outcomes. Engaged senior leadership should set expectations and measure success. They should be the sponsor, advocate, and driver for the adoption of best practices and evolution of the organization. Empower team members to take action when outcomes are at risk to minimize impact and encourage them to escalate to decision makers and stakeholders when they believe there is a risk so that it can be address and incidents avoided. Provide timely, clear, and actionable communications of known risks and planned events so that team members can take timely and appropriate action.

Encourage experimentation to accelerate learning and keeps team members interested and engaged. Teams must grow their skill sets to adopt new technologies, and to support changes in demand and responsibilities. Support and encourage this by providing dedicated structure time for learning. Ensure your team members have the resources, both tools and team members, to be successful and scale to support your business outcomes. Leverage cross-organizational diversity to seek multiple unique perspectives. Use this perspective to increase innovation, challenge your assumptions, and reduce the risk of confirmation bias. Grow inclusion, diversity, and accessibility within your teams to gain beneficial perspectives.

If there are external regulatory or compliance requirements that apply to your organization, you should use the resources provided by AWS Cloud Compliance to help educate your teams so that they can determine the impact on your priorities. The Well-Architected Framework emphasizes learning, measuring, and improving. It provides a consistent approach for you to evaluate architectures, and implement designs that will scale over time. AWS provides the AWS Well-Architected Tool to help you review your approach prior to development, the state of your workloads prior to production, and the state of your workloads in production. You can compare workloads to the latest AWS architectural best practices, monitor their overall status, and gain insight into potential risks. AWS Trusted Advisor is a tool that provides access to a core set of checks that recommend optimizations that may help shape your priorities. Business and Enterprise Support customers receive access to additional checks focusing on security, reliability, performance, and cost-optimization that can further help shape their priorities.

AWS can help you educate your teams about AWS and its services to increase their understanding of how their choices can have an impact on your workload. You should use the resources provided by AWS Support (AWS Knowledge Center, AWS Discussion Forums, and AWS Support Center) and AWS Documentation to educate your teams. Reach out to AWS Support through AWS Support Center for help with your AWS questions. AWS also shares best practices and patterns that we have learned through the operation of AWS in The Amazon Builders' Library. A wide variety of other useful information is available through the AWS Blog and The Official AWS Podcast. AWS Training and Certification provides some free training through self-paced digital courses on AWS fundamentals. You can also register for instructor-led training to further support the development of your teams’ AWS skills.

You should use tools or services that enable you to centrally govern your environments across accounts, such as AWS Organizations, to help manage your operating models. Services like AWS Control Tower expand this management capability by enabling you to define blueprints (supporting your operating models) for the setup of accounts, apply ongoing governance using AWS Organizations, and automate provisioning of new accounts. Managed Services providers such as AWS Managed Services, AWS Managed Services Partners, or Managed Services Providers in the AWS Partner Network, provide expertise implementing cloud environments, and support your security and compliance requirements and business goals. Adding Managed Services to your operating model can save you time and resources, and lets you keep your internal teams lean and focused on strategic outcomes that will differentiate your business, rather than developing new skills and capabilities.

**Q: How do you determine what your priorities are?**

Everyone needs to understand their part in enabling business success. Have shared goals in order to set priorities for resources. This will maximize the benefits of your efforts.

Best Practices:
- Evaluate external customer needs: Involve key stakeholders, including business, development, and operations teams, to determine where to focus efforts on external customer needs. This will ensure that you have a thorough understanding of the operations support that is required to achieve your desired business outcomes.
- Evaluate internal customer needs: Involve key stakeholders, including business, development, and operations teams, when determining where to focus efforts on internal customer needs. This will ensure that you have a thorough understanding of the operations support that is required to achieve business outcomes.
- Evaluate governance requirements: Ensure that you are aware of guidelines or obligations defined by your organization that may mandate or emphasize specific focus. Evaluate internal factors, such as organization policy, standards, and requirements. Validate that you have mechanisms to identify changes to governance. If no governance requirements are identified, ensure that you have applied due diligence to this determination.
- Evaluate compliance requirements: Evaluate external factors, such as regulatory compliance requirements and industry standards, to ensure that you are aware of guidelines or obligations that may mandate or emphasize specific focus. If no compliance requirements are identified, ensure that you apply due diligence to this determination.
- Evaluate threat landscape: Evaluate threats to the business (for example, competition, business risk and liabilities, operational risks, and information security threats) and maintain current information in a risk registry. Include the impact of risks when determining where to focus efforts.
- Evaluate tradeoffs: Evaluate the impact of tradeoffs between competing interests or alternative approaches, to help make informed decisions when determining where to focus efforts or choosing a course of action. For example, accelerating speed to market for new features may be emphasized over cost optimization, or you may choose a relational database for non-relational data to simplify the effort to migrate a system, rather than migrating to a database optimized for your data type and updating your application.
- Manage benefits and risks: Manage benefits and risks to make informed decisions when determining where to focus efforts. For example, it may be beneficial to deploy a workload with unresolved issues so that significant new features can be made available to customers. It may be possible to mitigate associated risks, or it may become unacceptable to allow a risk to remain, in which case you will take action to address the risk.

### Prepare

To prepare for operational excellence, you have to understand your workloads and their expected behaviors. You will then be able design them to provide insight to their status and build the procedures to support them.

Design your workload so that it provides the information necessary for you to understand its internal state (for example, metrics, logs, events, and traces) across all components in support of observability and investigating issues. Iterate to develop the telemetry necessary to monitor the health of your workload, identify when outcomes are at risk, and enable effective responses. When instrumenting your workload, capture a broad set of information to enable situational awareness (for example, changes in state, user activity, privilege access, utilization counters), knowing that you can use filters to select the most useful information over time.

Adopt approaches that improve the flow of changes into production and that enable refactoring, fast feedback on quality, and bug fixing. These accelerate beneficial changes entering production, limit issues deployed, and enable rapid identification and remediation of issues introduced through deployment activities or discovered in your environments.

Adopt approaches that provide fast feedback on quality and enable rapid recovery from changes that do not have desired outcomes. Using these practices mitigates the impact of issues introduced through the deployment of changes. Plan for unsuccessful changes so that you are able to respond faster if necessary and test and validate the changes you make. Be aware of planned activities in your environments so that you can manage the risk of changes impacting planed activities. Emphasize frequent, small, reversible changes to limit the scope of change. This results in easier troubleshooting and faster remediation with the option to roll back a change. It also means you are able to get the benefit of valuable changes more frequently.

Evaluate the operational readiness of your workload, processes, procedures, and personnel to understand the operational risks related to your workload. You should use a consistent process (including manual or automated checklists) to know when you are ready to go live with your workload or a change. This will also enable you to find any areas that you need to make plans to address. Have runbooks that document your routine activities and playbooks that guide your processes for issue resolution. Understand the benefits and risks to make informed decisions to allow changes to enter production.

AWS enables you to view your entire workload (applications, infrastructure, policy, governance, and operations) as code. This means you can apply the same engineering discipline that you use for application code to every element of your stack and share these across teams or organizations to magnify the benefits of development efforts. Use operations as code in the cloud and the ability to safely experiment to develop your workload, your operations procedures, and practice failure. Using AWS CloudFormation enables you to have consistent, templated, sandbox development, test, and production environments with increasing levels of operations control.

**Q: How do you know that you are ready to support a workload?**
Evaluate the operational readiness of your workload, processes and procedures, and personnel to understand the operational risks related to your workload.

Best Practices:
- Ensure personnel capability: Have a mechanism to validate that you have the appropriate number of trained personnel to provide support for operational needs. Train personnel and adjust personnel capacity as necessary to maintain effective support.
- Ensure consistent review of operational readiness: Ensure you have a consistent review of your readiness to operate a workload. Reviews must include, at a minimum, the operational readiness of the teams and the workload, and security requirements. Implement review activities in code and trigger automated review in response to events where appropriate, to ensure consistency, speed of execution, and reduce errors caused by manual processes.
- Use runbooks to perform procedures: Runbooks are documented procedures to achieve specific outcomes. Enable consistent and prompt responses to well-understood events by documenting procedures in runbooks. Implement runbooks as code and trigger the execution of runbooks in response to events where appropriate, to ensure consistency, speed responses, and reduce errors caused by manual processes.
- Use playbooks to investigate issues: Enable consistent and prompt responses to issues that are not well understood, by documenting the investigation process in playbooks. Playbooks are the predefined steps performed to identify the factors contributing to a failure scenario. The results from any process step are used to determine the next steps to take until the issue is identified or escalated.
- Make informed decisions to deploy systems and changes: Evaluate the capabilities of the team to support the workload and the workload's compliance with governance. Evaluate these against the benefits of deployment when determining whether to transition a system or change into production. Understand the benefits and risks to make informed decisions.


### Operate
Successful operation of a workload is measured by the achievement of business and customer outcomes. Define expected outcomes, determine how success will be measured, and identify metrics that will be used in those calculations to determine if your workload and operations are successful. Operational health includes both the health of the workload and the health and success of the operations activities performed in support of the workload (for example, deployment and incident response). Establish metrics baselines for improvement, investigation, and intervention, collect and analyze your metrics, and then validate your understanding of operations success and how it changes over time. Use collected metrics to determine if you are satisfying customer and business needs, and identify areas for improvement.

Efficient and effective management of operational events is required to achieve operational excellence. This applies to both planned and unplanned operational events. Use established runbooks for well-understood events, and use playbooks to aid in investigation and resolution of issues. Prioritize responses to events based on their business and customer impact. Ensure that if an alert is raised in response to an event, there is an associated process to be executed, with a specifically identified owner. Define in advance the personnel required to resolve an event and include escalation triggers to engage additional personnel, as it becomes necessary, based on urgency and impact. Identify and engage individuals with the authority to make a decision on courses of action where there will be a business impact from an event response not previously addressed.

Communicate the operational status of workloads through dashboards and notifications that are tailored to the target audience (for example, customer, business, developers, operations) so that they may take appropriate action, so that their expectations are managed, and so that they are informed when normal operations resume.

In AWS, you can generate dashboard views of your metrics collected from workloads and natively from AWS. You can leverage CloudWatch or third-party applications to aggregate and present business, workload, and operations level views of operations activities. AWS provides workload insights through logging capabilities including AWS X-Ray, CloudWatch, CloudTrail, and VPC Flow Logs enabling the identification of workload issues in support of root cause analysis and remediation.

### Evolve
You must learn, share, and continuously improve to sustain operational excellence. Dedicate work cycles to making continuous incremental improvements. Perform post-incident analysis of all customer impacting events. Identify the contributing factors and preventative action to limit or prevent recurrence. Communicate contributing factors with affected communities as appropriate. Regularly evaluate and prioritize opportunities for improvement (for example, feature requests, issue remediation, and compliance requirements), including both the workload and operations procedures. Include feedback loops within your procedures to rapidly identify areas for improvement and capture learnings from the execution of operations.

Share lessons learned across teams to share the benefits of those lessons. Analyze trends within lessons learned and perform cross-team retrospective analysis of operations metrics to identify opportunities and methods for improvement. Implement changes intended to bring about improvement and evaluate the results to determine success.

On AWS, you can export your log data to Amazon S3 or send logs directly to Amazon S3 for long-term storage. Using AWS Glue, you can discover and prepare your log data in Amazon S3 for analytics, and store associated metadata in the AWS Glue Data Catalog. Amazon Athena, through its native integration with AWS Glue, can then be used to analyze your log data, querying it using standard SQL. Using a business intelligence tool like Amazon QuickSight, you can visualize, explore, and analyze your data. Discovering trends and events of interest that may drive improvement.

**Q: How do you evolve operations?**
Dedicate time and resources for continuous incremental improvement to evolve the effectiveness and efficiency of your operations.

Best Practices:
- Have a process for continuous improvement: Regularly evaluate and prioritize opportunities for improvement to focus efforts where they can provide the greatest benefits.
- Perform post-incident analysis: Review customer-impacting events, and identify the contributing factors and preventative actions. Use this information to develop mitigations to limit or prevent recurrence. Develop procedures for prompt and effective responses. Communicate contributing factors and corrective actions as appropriate, tailored to target audiences.
- Implement feedback loops: Include feedback loops in your procedures and workloads to help you identify issues and areas that need improvement.
- Perform Knowledge Management: Mechanisms exist for your team members to discover the information that they are looking for in a timely manner, access it, and identify that it’s current and complete. Mechanisms are present to identify needed content, content in need of refresh, and content that should be archived so that it’s no longer referenced.
- Define drivers for improvement: Identify drivers for improvement to help you evaluate and prioritize opportunities.
- Validate insights: Review your analysis results and responses with cross-functional teams and business owners. Use these reviews to establish common understanding, identify additional impacts, and determine courses of action. Adjust responses as appropriate.
- Perform operations metrics reviews: Regularly perform retrospective analysis of operations metrics with cross-team participants from different areas of the business. Use these reviews to identify opportunities for improvement, potential courses of action, and to share lessons learned.
- Document and share lessons learned: Document and share lessons learned from the execution of operations activities so that you can use them internally and across teams.
- Allocate time to make improvements: Dedicate time and resources within your processes to make continuous incremental improvements possible.
